English is an Anglo-Frisian language. The following is an outline of the traditional view long held by an overwhelming majority of scholars: When the Romans came to Great Britain, all native peoples in the southeast of the island spoke an early form of Brythonic (the ancestor of Modern Welsh). Unlike in Gaul and Hispania, the indigenous population did not adopt Latin as a native language during the Roman era, where it was mainly confined to the Roman cities and garrisons. After some centuries of Roman occupation, the inhabitants belonged to a culture labelled Romano-British, in which most people used the Brythonic as the language of everyday life. Germanic-speaking peoples from various parts of northwest Germany (Saxons, Angles) as well as Jutland (Jutes) invaded around the 5th century AD, killing or driving off the Brythonic-speaking natives and replacing them.

The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle says that in AD 449, British king Vortigern invited warriors from 'three peoples of Germania' (Old Saxons, Angles and Jutes) to come to Great Britain to fight against the Picts, giving them land as payment. These Germanic peoples then sent for reinforcements and attacked the Britons. Essentially this version of events was accepted at face value by scholars for a long time.

Recently these ideas have been questioned by many scholars due to new genetic data[5] and re-evaluation of archaeological evidence. Some scholars have claimed that the Germanic-speaking invaders contributed only to a small proportion of population, and the native Romano-British population was not substantially displaced in any part of Britain. If correct, this interpretation of events would imply that the native Celts in the south and east of Britain, gradually adopted the language and culture of a politically and socially dominant ruling class (see Sub-Roman Britain). Celtic languages survived in parts of the island not colonised by the invaders: Scotland, Wales, Cornwall, and, to some extent, Cumbria.

Other scholars have gone further and suggested that Germanic languages were already spoken in southeast Great Britain before the arrival of the Romans. The coast of southeast Great Britain was described as Litus Saxonicum (the Saxon Shores) in Latin, a title which first appears in the Notitia Dignitatum of around AD 425. It has long been debated whether the Romans gave it this name because it was attacked by Saxons, or settled with Saxons, possibly as part of the common Roman frontier policy of settling barbarians in areas which were subject to attack from other barbarians.[6] More recently it has been suggested that the real reason for the name was that its people during Roman times were labelled by the Romans as Saxons, and that they spoke a Germanic language.

Geneticist Stephen Oppenheimer in his Origins of the British, while acknowledging that the evidence is too slight to be certain, tentatively suggests the following. After the Last Glacial Maximum, the British Isles were colonised by people from the Basque Country. Their language is unknown. Several thousand years ago, a sea trade network linked the western British Isles to the Atlantic coast of Europe (France, Spain) and a separate sea trade network linked eastern Great Britain to other parts of the North Sea shore, particularly Scandinavia. The Atlantic trade network introduced the Celtic languages to the western part of Great Britain and the islands to its west very early (some millennia BC) and the North Sea trade network introduced the Germanic languages to eastern Great Britain, probably before the arrival of the Romans. However, the proportion of genetic intrusion is both cases is slight. Oppenheimer claims that in the British Isles as a whole, 60% of male gene groups come from the original Basque Country settlers, while this figure reaches 88% in Ireland. According to Oppenheimer's theory, Celtic languages were never spoken in eastern Great Britain: the Romans arrived there to find people speaking Germanic or some other language group now lost.

Iulius Caesar and Tacitus both tell us that peoples on the south coast of southeast Great Britain spoke the same language as the Belgae on the opposite continental coast. It has long been supposed that the Belgae spoke Celtic, but in fact the evidence is not clear. It seems most likely that the Belgae were not a linguistically homogenous group, but that some spoke Celtic, some spoke Germanic, and possibly another language group was also present.

Whatever their origin, these Germanic dialects eventually coalesced to a degree and formed what is today called the Old English language, which resembled some coastal dialects in what are now northwest Germany and the Netherlands (i.e. Frisia). Throughout the history of written Old English, it retained a synthetic structure closer to that of Proto-Indo-European, being based on a single literary standard, while spoken Old English became increasingly analytic in nature, losing the more complex noun case system, with a heavier reliance on prepositions and fixed word-order. This is evident in the Middle English period, when literature is first recorded in the various spoken dialects of English of the time, after written Old English lost its status as the literary language of the nobility. It has been postulated that the early development of the language may have been influenced by a Celtic substratum.[7][8] Later, it was influenced by the related North Germanic language Old Norse, spoken by the Vikings who settled mainly in the north and the east coast down to London, the area known as the Danelaw.

Then came the Norman Conquest of England in 1066. For about 300 years following, the Norman kings and the high nobility spoke only Anglo-Norman, which was very close to Old French. A large number of Norman words found their way into Old English. Later, a large number of words were borrowed directly from Latin and Greek, especially for scientific and technical terms, leaving a parallel vocabulary that persists into modern times. The Norman influence strongly affected the evolution of the language over the following centuries, resulting in what is now referred to as Middle English.

During the 15th century, Middle English was transformed by the Great Vowel Shift, the spread of a standardised London-based dialect in government and administration, and the standardising effect of printing. Early Modern English can be traced back to around the time of William Shakespeare.